Support installing OSSM Console without a Kiali server present ("lite mode") (#1002)
kiali/kiali.io: content/en/docs/Installation/installation-guide/creating-updating-ossmconsole-cr.md

weight: 45
---

OpenShift ServiceMesh Console (aka OSSMC) provides a Kiali integration with the OpenShift Console; in other words it provides Kiali functionality within the context of the OpenShift Console when a Kiali server is connected to the plugin. OSSMC is applicable only within OpenShift environments.

> The main component of OSSMC is a plugin that gets installed inside the OpenShift Console. Prior to installing this plugin, you must install the Kiali Operator. A Kiali Server is optional for the initial plugin install — without it, OSSMC still provides **Istio control planes** and **Kiali instances** pages for navigating multiple mesh instances from the console. See [Navigating Multiple Meshes](/docs/ossmc/navigating-multiple-meshes/). Please see the [Installation Guide](/docs/installation/installation-guide/) for Kiali Operator installation details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main component of OSSMC is a plugin that gets installed inside the OpenShift Console. Prior to installing this plugin, you must install the Kiali Operator. A Kiali Server is optional for the initial plugin install — without it, OSSMC still provides **Istios** and **Kialis** pages for navigating multiple mesh instances from the console. See [Navigating Multiple Meshes](/docs/ossmc/navigating-multiple-meshes/). Please see the [Installation Guide](/docs/installation/installation-guide/) for Kiali Operator installation details.
```

## Creating the OSSMConsole CR to Install the OSSMC Plugin

With the Kiali Operator installed, you can install the OSSMC plugin in one of two ways — either via the OpenShift Console or via the `oc` CLI. Both methods are described below. You choose the method you want to use.

> A Kiali Server is not required for installation. If no Kiali instance is connected to the plugin, OSSMC provides **Istio control planes** and **Kiali instances** for multi-mesh navigation in the console (see [Navigating Multiple Meshes](/docs/ossmc/navigating-multiple-meshes/)). To enable Kiali-powered observability pages, connect a Kiali instance after installation — see [Connecting a Kiali instance to the console](#connecting-a-kiali-instance-to-the-console) below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Kiali Server is not required for installation. If no Kiali instance is connected to the plugin, OSSMC provides **Istios** and **Kialis** for multi-mesh navigation in the console (see [Navigating Multiple Meshes](/docs/ossmc/navigating-multiple-meshes/)). To enable Kiali-powered observability pages, connect a Kiali instance after installation — see [Connecting a Kiali instance to the console](#connecting-a-kiali-instance-to-the-console) below.
```

![Plugin Ready](/images/documentation/ossmc/03-ui-installed-cr-plugin-ready.png)

## Installing without a connected Kiali server

> You can install OSSMC without connecting a Kiali server to the plugin. In that case, the Service Mesh menu provides **Istio control planes** and **Kiali instances** so you can navigate multiple mesh instances from the OpenShift Console. See [Navigating Multiple Meshes](/docs/ossmc/navigating-multiple-meshes/) for what those pages provide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can install OSSMC without connecting a Kiali server to the plugin. In that case, the Service Mesh menu provides **Istios** and **Kialis** so you can navigate multiple mesh instances from the OpenShift Console. See [Navigating Multiple Meshes](/docs/ossmc/navigating-multiple-meshes/) for what those pages provide.
```

A minimal OSSMConsole CR is sufficient when no Kiali server exists on the cluster and auto-discovery finds nothing to connect to:

```yaml
apiVersion: kiali.io/v1alpha1
kind: OSSMConsole
metadata:
  name: ossmconsole
  namespace: openshift-operators
spec:
  version: default
```

To leave the plugin disconnected from Kiali explicitly (for example, when Kiali exists on the cluster but should not be used by OSSMC), set `spec.kiali` as follows:

```yaml
spec:
  kiali:
    autoDiscover: false
    serviceName: ""
    serviceNamespace: ""
    servicePort: 0
```

## Connecting a Kiali instance to the console

To enable OSSMC pages that require a Kiali server, connect a Kiali server to the plugin. You can do this in two ways:

> 1. **OpenShift Console UI** — Open **Service Mesh** → **Kiali instances**, select a Kiali instance, and click **Connect**. This patches the OSSMConsole CR with the Kiali service name and namespace. See [Navigating Multiple Meshes](/docs/ossmc/navigating-multiple-meshes/#kiali-instances) for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **OpenShift Console UI** — Open **Service Mesh** → **Kialis**, select a Kiali instance, and click **Connect**. This patches the OSSMConsole CR with the Kiali service name and namespace. See [Navigating Multiple Meshes](/docs/ossmc/navigating-multiple-meshes/#kiali-instances) for details.
```

2. **OSSMConsole CR** — Set `spec.kiali.serviceName`, `spec.kiali.serviceNamespace`, and `spec.kiali.servicePort` to match the Kiali service. Alternatively, leave those fields empty and set `spec.kiali.autoDiscover` to `true` to let the operator discover Kiali from its OpenShift Route.

After connecting, refresh the OpenShift Console if pages that require Kiali do not appear immediately. The Kiali Operator must reconcile the OSSMConsole CR before OSSMC can connect. You may have to wait for a small amount of time and refresh the browser window to see those pages.

## Disconnecting from a Kiali server

> To disconnect OSSMC from a Kiali server (**Istio control planes** and **Kiali instances** remain available for multi-mesh navigation):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disconnect OSSMC from a Kiali server (**Istios** and **Kialis** remain available for multi-mesh navigation):
```

> 1. **OpenShift Console UI** — On the **Kiali instances** detail page for the connected instance, click **Disconnect**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **OpenShift Console UI** — On the **Kialis** detail page for the connected instance, click **Disconnect**.
```
